THE ATTRACTION of medieval literature comes perhaps more strongly
from some other countries than from England. In France and Provence,
in Germany and Iceland, there were literary adventurers more daring
and achievements more distinguished. It was not in England that the
most wonderful things were produced; there is nothing in old English
that takes hold of the mind with that masterful and subduing power
which still belongs to the lyrical stanzas of the troubadours and
minnesingers, to Welsh romance, or to the epic prose of the Iceland
histories.  1 The Norman Conquest degraded the English language from
its literary rank, and brought in a new language for the politer
literature. It did not destroy, in one sense it did not absolutely
interrupt, English literature; but it took away the English literary
standard, and threw the country back into the condition of Italy
before Dante--an anarchy of dialects. When a new literary language
was established in the time of Chaucer, the Middle Ages were nearly
over: and so it happened that for the greatest of the medieval
centuries, the twelfth and thirteenth, the centuries of the
Crusades, of the Hohenstaufen Emperors, of St. Francis, St. Dominic,
and St. Louis, there is in English no great representative work in
prose or rhyme. There are better things, it is true, than the
staggering rhythms of Layamon, or the wooden precision of Orm: the
Ancren Riwle is better. But there is no one who can be taken, as
some of the writers in other countries can--Crestien de Troies, for
instance, or Walther von der Vogelweide, or Villehardouin--there is
no one in England who can be taken for a representative poet or
orator, giving out what can be recognised at once, and is recognised
instinctively, as the best possible literary work of its own day and
its own kind. The beauty of medieval poetry and prose is not to be
found in England, or only in a faint reflected way. England did not
possess the heart of the mystery. To spend much time with the worthy
clerks who promoted Christian and useful knowledge in the thirteenth
and fourteenth century dialects of Lincoln or Yorkshire, Kent or
Dorset, is to acquire an invincible appetite for the glory of other
countries not quite so tame, for the pride of life of the castles
and gardens of Languedoc or Swabia, for the winds of the forest of
Broceliande. Not in the English tongue were the great stories
told. Almost everything in the literature of the Middle Ages that is
out of the common, that is in any sense magical or inspired, comes
from beyond the English borders.  2 For all this want of distinction
there is some compensation. The early English literature, if not
representative of what is keenest and strongest, or most exalted, in
the intellect of Europe in these times, is admirably fitted to
convey to after generations both the common sense and the
commonplaces of Western civilisation, from the ninth century
onward. A study of English literature alone would give a very false
and insufficient idea of the heights attained in the progress of
European literature as a whole: for there were worlds of imagination
and poetical art which were open to some of the other nations, and
not at all or very imperfectly to the English. But English
literature contains and preserves, in a better and completer form
than elsewhere, the common ideas, the intellectual and educational
ground-work of the Middle Ages; and that is something. The average
mind at any rate is well represented. Prose and its development can
be observed very fully and satisfactorily from a very early
date. One of the chief interests of the early literature is that it
reflects the process by which the native Teutonic civilisation of
the English became metamorphosed by the intrusion of alien ideas,
either Latin or transmitted through Latin; by the struggles of the
English mind to overcome and assimilate the civilisation of the
Roman Empire. Sometimes it is easy, sometimes not so easy, to
distinguish the two kinds of thinking, native and foreign. The
alliterative heroic poetry of the Anglo-Saxons is inherited, not
imported; it is the product of centuries during which the German
tribes were educating themselves, and making experiments in poetry
(among other things) till they gradually formed the established epic
type, which in essentials, in style and phrasing, and even in
subject matter, is common to Continental Germany and Scandinavia, in
early times, along with England. It may be compared, even by
temperate critics, to the Homeric poetry of Greece, and the
comparison need not be misleading. The Anglo-Saxon prose, on the
other hand, much of which is contemporaneous with the heroic poetry,
is generally derivative and Latin in spirit, repeating and adapting
ideas that are very far removed from simplicity. While on the one
hand there are analogies with the Homeric age and the Homeric poems
in Anglo-Saxon society and poetry, on the other hand there are many
things in the work of the Anglo-Saxon writers which make one think
of the way European ideas are now being taken up, without
preparation, in the East--of the wholesale modern progress of Japan,
and its un-Hellenic confusion. The spectacle is sometimes painful;
it cannot be called dull. The same sort of thing, the conflict of
the two realms of ideas, German and Latin, went on in all modern
nations, beginning in the first encounter of the Northern tribes
with the intellectual and spiritual powers of Rome. This conflict is
really the whole matter of early modern history. In England its
character is brought out more plainly than elsewhere, and, in spite
of the Norman Conquest and other interfering circumstances, the
process or progress is continuous. For which reason, if for nothing
else, it is convenient to begin at the beginning in dealing with the
history of English poetry or prose.  3 The work for which prose was
needed first of all was mainly that of instruction; and of the early
didactic prose a great part is translation or adaptation. From the
time of Ulfilas to the time of Wycliffe and the time of Caxton, and
since, there has been ceaseless activity of the workers who have had
to quarry into, and break up, and make portable and useful, the
great mass left by the older civilisations for the Goths and their
successors to do their best with.  4 The early English literature is
strong in translations. Translations were the books most necessary
for people who wanted to know about things, and who knew that the
most important questions had already been answered by the Latin
authors, so that it was a waste of time for the English or other
simple folk to try to find out things for themselves. The quarry of
Latin learning was worked zealously, and the evidences left by that
activity are more than respectable. The Anglo-Saxon Bible versions,
and Alfred's library of text-books--Orosius, Boetius, Gregory, and
the translation of Bede's history--are works which in point of style
have attained the virtues of plain narration or exposition, and even
something more; and the matter of them is such as was not antiquated
for many centuries after Alfred. It was long before the other
nations were as well provided in their own languages with useful
hand-books of instruction. Besides the translations, there were
other didactic works in different departments. There is a
considerable stock of sermons--some of them imaginative and strong in
narrative, like the one on the Harrowing of Hell in the Blickling
Homilies, and others, like the Sermones Catholici of AElfric, more
soft and gentle in their tone, more finished in their
rhetoric. These may not appeal to every reader; but the same might
be said of the works of many later divines than AElfric.  5 The old
English educational literature--hand-books and homilies--had merits
that were of lasting importance. The history of English prose cannot
afford to ignore the books which, whatever may have been their
shortcomings, established good habits of composition, made it fairly
easy, for those who would, to put English words together into
sentences, and gave more than one good pattern of sentence for
students to copy. The rhetorical value of the didactic prose will be
rated high by any one who values a sound convention or tradition of
ordinary prose style for ordinary useful purposes. There are higher
kinds of literature than the useful; but it is something to have
different kinds of useful prose at one's command, and this in the
tenth century was singular and exceptional among the vernacular
tongues of the North and West. In so far as the intellectual problem
for the early English prose writers was the reproduction of Latin
learning, they took the right way to solve it, and were more than
fortunate in the machinery they invented and used to adapt and work
up the old Latin materials.  6 The difficulty of the problem may
easily be underestimated. There were many things to hinder the
adoption of a decent prose convention. There was on the one hand the
danger of a close and slavish imitation of the foreign models. One
is reminded by a clumsy participle absolute here and there that the
temptation which was too much for Ulfilas also beset the
Anglo-Saxons, who for the most part resisted successfully the
temptations of foreign grammatical constructions, comparing well in
this respect not only with the Grecisms of Ulfilas, but with the
distracted participles of the Wycliffite Bible. The Latinism of the
Anglo-Saxon prose is to be found mainly in the use of conditional
clauses and a closer bracing of the parts of the sentence than comes
naturally in primitive essays.
